Doc: kraken internals (#3028)
CanalTP/navitia: source/kraken/readme.md

# Kraken

> Kraken is the public transport trip planner and much more, it can provide schedules, timetables and expose public

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kraken is a public transport trip planner and much more, it provides schedules, timetables and expose public
```

transport data via
[PTReferential](https://github.com/CanalTP/navitia/blob/dev/documentation/rfc/ptref_grammar.md).

> It also provide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also provides:
```

  - (bad) street network routing that will be replaced by [asgard](https://github.com/CanalTP/asgard)
  - autocomplete that will be replaced by [mimir](https://github.com/CanalTP/mimirsbrunn)

## Configuration

> Kraken can be configured by multiple way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kraken can be configured in multiple ways:
```

  - configuration file
  - command line arguments
  - environment variables

### Configuration file
Kraken will try to load a configuration file named the same way as the binary with a `.ini` prefix in the

> current directory, so by default it will search for a `kraken.ini` file. Alternatively the file can be passed as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
current directory, so by default it will search for a `kraken.ini` file. Alternatively the file can be passed in as
```

Author: `in as`? `as` should be removed no?

Reviewer: as in the idiomatic expression 'pass in' - https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/pass+in. But I'm being nitpicking here.

the first positional argument.

> Example of configuration file, the values are the defaults:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example of configuration file, defaults values are:
```

log_format = [%D{%y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S,%q}] [%p] [%x] - %m %b:%L  %n

# configuration of logs, passed directly to log4cplus
# see: https://log4cplus.sourceforge.io/docs/html/classlog4cplus_1_1PropertyConfigurator.html#a21e8e6b1440cc7a8a47b8fd14c54b239
[LOG]
log4cplus.rootLogger= DEBUG, ALL_MSGS
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS=log4cplus::ConsoleAppender
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS.layout=log4cplus::PatternLayout
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS.layout.ConversionPattern=[%D{%y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S,%q}] [%p] [%x] - %m %b:%L  %n

# configuration of rabbitmq
[BROKER]
host = localhost
port = 5672
username = guest
password = guest
vhost = /
exchange = navitia
# realtime contributors to listen, repeat the line to add multiple contributor
rt_topics =

# should we delete the queue at shutdown, useful only for tests
queue_auto_delete = false
# timeout for waiting messages from rabbitmq
timeout = 100
# time to wait between each poll of rabbitmq in seconds (should not be updated)
sleeptime = 1
#rabbitmq's queue name to be bound, only used for tests
queue =

[CHAOS]
# connection string to the chaos database, format: host=localhost user=navitia password=navitia dbname=chaos
database =
```
### CLI arguments

> The parameters are based on the configuration file, they have the following form: `--section.option value`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters are based on the configuration file with the following form: `--section.option value`
```

By example if we want to define the database we have to do `--GENERAL.database database.nav.lz4`.

### Environment variables
The environment variables are based on the configuration file, they have the following form:
`KRAKEN_SECTION_OPTION`
By example if we want to define the number of thread we have to set `GENERAL_nb_threads=1`.

## Startup

At startup kraken do the following actions:
1. load configuration
2. open connection to rabbitmq
3. Data loading

> 4. start background thread that handle disruptions, realtime and data reloading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. start background thread that handles disruptions, realtime and data reloading
```

> 5. bind zmq sockets: at this point the configured tcp port start accepting connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. bind zmq sockets: at this point the configured tcp port starts accepting connection
```

6. start worker threads to handle requests

## Data loading

Data loading is triggered by two events:
  - at startup
  - by an order received from rabbitmq

> kraken start by reading the `nav.lz4` file configured, it then applies disruptions by loading them from the chaos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kraken starts by reading the `nav.lz4` file configured, it then applies disruptions by loading them from the chaos
```

database.
Kraken will do the following actions:

1. load data.nav.lz4
2. load disruptions from chaos's database
3. load realtime from kirin:
    1. kraken creates an anonymous queue in rabbitmq
    2. kraken sends a request to kirin via rabbitmq with the queue name as parameter

>     3. kraken wait for a message in the queue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. kraken waits for a message in the queue
```

>     4. kirin builds a "ntfs-rt" and send it to the queue previously created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    4. kirin builds a "ntfs-rt" and sends it to the queue previously created
```

    5. kraken receives the message and apply the realtime data
4. build raptor
5. build relations
6. build proximitylist

> When a data loading occur after startup the process is the same but is done on another dataset, this mean that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a data loading occurs after startup the process is the same but is done on another dataset, this means that
```

memory usage will double during reload.
There is no service interruption as we have two datasets in memory, there is no locking done to prevent blocking
requests. Swap of dataset is done by an atomic swap of pointer.

## Realtime integration

> realtime in this chapter mean any modification of the static data, so it can be disruptions from Chaos or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, 'realtime' means any modification of the static data, hence disruptions from Chaos or
```

realtime_update from Kirin.

These data are received from rabbitmq, kraken will handle multiple messages in batch (up to 5000).

> The processes is very similar to a data reloading, it is done in background on another dataset to prevent impacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process is very similar to a data reload, it is done in background on another dataset to prevent impacts
```

on requests.

The following actions are done:
1. clone `Data` to have a writable dataset, this is quite slow
2. update `Data` with the realtime data
3. build relations
4. build autocomplete
5. build raptor
6. build proximitylist
7. rebuild raptor cache from the previous Data
8. switch `Data`

> Rebuild of raptor cache is not strictly required, but reduce the slowdown of the first few request on the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rebuilding raptor's cache is not strictly required, but it reducse the slowdown of the first few requests on the new
```

# Kraken
Kraken is a public transport trip planner and much more, it provides schedules, timetables and expose public
transport data via

> [PTReferential](https://github.com/CanalTP/navitia/blob/dev/documentation/rfc/ptref_grammar.md).

Reviewer 2: minor: for newline
```suggestion
[PTReferential](https://github.com/CanalTP/navitia/blob/dev/documentation/rfc/ptref_grammar.md).  
```
(or a blank line)

It also provides:
  - (bad) street network routing that will be replaced by [asgard](https://github.com/CanalTP/asgard)
  - autocomplete that will be replaced by [mimir](https://github.com/CanalTP/mimirsbrunn)

## Configuration
Kraken can be configured in multiple ways:
  - configuration file
  - command line arguments
  - environment variables

### Configuration file
Kraken will try to load a configuration file named the same way as the binary with a `.ini` prefix in the

> current directory, so by default it will search for a `kraken.ini` file. Alternatively the file can be passed in as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
current directory, so by default it will search for a `kraken.ini` file. Alternatively the file path can be passed in as
```

the first positional argument.

Example of configuration file, defaults values are:
```
[GENERAL]
# Path to data file
database = data.nav.lz4
# zmq socket to bind, see: http://api.zeromq.org/3-2:zmq-connect (required)
zmq_socket =
# name of the coverage (required)
instance_name =
# number of thread created to serve resquests
nb_threads = 1

# enable loading of realtime data
is_realtime_enabled = false

> # enable loading of realtime data that add stop_times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# enable loading of realtime data that add stop_times (only if is_realtime_enabled is activated)
```

is_realtime_add_enabled = false
# enable loading of realtime data that add trips (only if is_realtime_add_enabled is activated)
is_realtime_add_trip_enabled = false
# timeout in ms for loading realtime data from kirin
kirin_timeout = 60000
# timeout in ms before retrying to load realtime data
kirin_retry_timeout = 300000
# request running a least this number of milliseconds are logged
slow_request_duration = 1000
# display all contributors in feed publishers
display_contributors = True
# number of cache raptor to keep at most. improve performances by increasing memory usage
raptor_cache_size = 10
# binding for metrics http server, format: IP:PORT
metrics_binding =

> # ulimit that define the maximum size of a core file<Paste>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# ulimit that defines the maximum size of a core file<Paste>
```

core_file_size_limit = 0

> # log level, mostly use when configurating kraken by cli or envvar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# log level, mostly used when configurating kraken by cli or envvar
```

log_level =

> # log format, mostly use when configurating kraken by cli or envvar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# log format, mostly used when configurating kraken by cli or envvar
```

log_format = [%D{%y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S,%q}] [%p] [%x] - %m %b:%L  %n

# configuration of logs, passed directly to log4cplus
# see: https://log4cplus.sourceforge.io/docs/html/classlog4cplus_1_1PropertyConfigurator.html#a21e8e6b1440cc7a8a47b8fd14c54b239
[LOG]
log4cplus.rootLogger= DEBUG, ALL_MSGS
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS=log4cplus::ConsoleAppender
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS.layout=log4cplus::PatternLayout
log4cplus.appender.ALL_MSGS.layout.ConversionPattern=[%D{%y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S,%q}] [%p] [%x] - %m %b:%L  %n

# configuration of rabbitmq
[BROKER]
host = localhost
port = 5672
username = guest
password = guest
vhost = /
exchange = navitia

> # realtime contributors to listen, repeat the line to add multiple contributor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# realtime contributors to listen, repeat the line to add multiple contributors
```

    4. kirin builds a "ntfs-rt" and sends it to the queue previously created
    5. kraken receives the message and apply the realtime data
4. build raptor
5. build relations
6. build proximitylist

When a data loading occurs after startup the process is the same but is done on another dataset, this means that
memory usage will double during reload.
There is no service interruption as we have two datasets in memory, there is no locking done to prevent blocking
requests. Swap of dataset is done by an atomic swap of pointer.

## Realtime integration

In this chapter, 'realtime' means any modification of the static data, hence disruptions from Chaos or
realtime_update from Kirin.

These data are received from rabbitmq, kraken will handle multiple messages in batch (up to 5000).
The process is very similar to a data reload, it is done in background on another dataset to prevent impacts
on requests.

The following actions are done:
1. clone `Data` to have a writable dataset, this is quite slow
2. update `Data` with the realtime data
3. build relations
4. build autocomplete
5. build raptor
6. build proximitylist
7. rebuild raptor cache from the previous Data
8. switch `Data`

> Rebuilding raptor's cache is not strictly required, but it reducse the slowdown of the first few requests on the new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rebuilding raptor's cache is not strictly required, but it reduces the slowdown of the first few requests on the new
```

dataset.

## Request handling

> The main thread execute the [`ZMQ LoadBalancer`](https://github.com/CanalTP/utils/blob/master/zmq.h) that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main thread executes the [`ZMQ LoadBalancer`](https://github.com/CanalTP/utils/blob/master/zmq.h) that
```

> dispatch requests to available worker threads, it only forward the requests to a worker and respond to the client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dispatches requests to available worker threads, it only forwards the requests to a worker and responds to the client
```

once the worker have finished. There is no serialization done here, only (unneeded) copy of bytes.

> Wait queue is not handled by the load balancer, it won't accept a request if there is no worker available, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The waiting queue is not handled by the load balancer, it won't accept a request if there is no worker available, the
```

queue is managed by zmq.
Communication between threads is done with [zmq inproc sockets](http://api.zeromq.org/2-1:zmq-inproc).

> Workers threads start by registering themselves to the load balancer and start waiting for requests. Each threads

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Workers threads start by registering themselves to the load balancer and start waiting for requests. Each thread
```

can only handle one request concurrently.

When a request is received the following actions occur:
1. read request and deserialize it
2. if enabled create a deadline object to terminate requests
3. acquire a readonly Data object that will be used for this request

> 4. check if deadline has expired

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. check if the deadline has expired
```

5. initialize worker if needed: first request with a new dataset
    1. creation of raptor planner
    2. creation of streetnetwork planner
6. initialisation of `pb_creator` used to build the response
7. execute handler of this API
8. build response from `pb_creator`
9. respond to LB

In case of error the thread will respond with the error message, termination by deadline is handled like an
error.

### Raptor cache
The raptor cache is a structure shared between every raptor planner that contains an optimized

> reprensation of stoptimes for a specific period of time. Every request that compute stoptimes (journeys,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
representation of stoptimes for a specific period of time. Every request that computes stoptimes (journeys,
```

> departures, *_schedules) will need a raptor cache for the date of the request as raptor cache only contains 48

Reviewer 2: To me, the 48h are kind of side-consideration, the most important is that a raptor cache is attached and usable on one precise day, no more no less.
Maybe this is clearer:
```suggestion
departures, *_schedules) will use the raptor cache attached the starting day of the request (raptor cache only contains 48 hours of data to handle pass-midnight journeys)
```

> departures, *_schedules) will use the raptor cache attached the starting day of the request (raptor cache only contains 48 hours of data to handle pass-midnight journeys)

Reviewer: ```
will use the raptor cache attached **to/with/(insert something here)?** the starting day of the request 
```
Not sure what you meant here :thinking:

Reviewer 2: I suggested it: I meant that even if there is more than 24 hours of data in cache raptor, a cache instance is mutualized for 24hours only...
(hard to explain without a drawing I guess)

hours of data.
These stoptimes are sorted and contiguous in memory to maximize cpu caching.

By default we can create at most 10 raptor caches, these are kept by a simple LRU that will discard "unused"
values. Creation of raptor cache is quite costly, it will take a few hundred milliseconds on somethings like
fr-idf.

The raptor cache is quite special in kraken's design as it is the only data structure writable by multiple
threads.

> 

Reviewer: Everything is in italic until the end? Did you forget a special character somewhere?

Author: the github code parser doesn't like the `*_schedules` but the resulting page isn't in italic so....
